There's that music again. Welcome back to Shiloh Creek, little ones — and if it's your first time here at the water, settle in close beside me.
Let me ask you something. Did you ever only half-hear somebody — catch the start of it, miss the rest — and just fill in the middle your own self, and go racing off after the wrong idea entirely?
Well. God gave us a way to listen and a way to speak — and the old folks say we get more chances to listen than to talk. I'm going to tell you about a morning a little message went 'round the creek friend-to-friend, and came out the other end wonderfully wrong. And about a quiet visitor, and a quieter friend, who set it right. The Bible's got a line about all this — but we'll come to that by the water.
It was a bright, busy morning by the creek, everybody talking at once — when down the path came a small streak of a thing, all stripes and breath. Chitter the chipmunk, all the way from the far meadow, skidded to a stop, and out it all came.
Okay — okay — listen, listen! The bend-tree! Its first blossom — it OPENED! And you KNOW the bend-tree does that funny Shiloh Creek thing — it opens for just one morning, then tucks itself away till next spring! So it's ONLY this morning! Come see — come SEE before it tucks away!
Wait — wait — the bend-tree's doing WHAT? A blossom — TOSS? Ooh — a blossom TOSS! Like you toss the blossoms, up and up, and everyone catches one? I LOVE a toss. I'm SO good at tosses. Okay — who told the others? I'll tell the others!
No — no, not a toss, a BLOSSOM, the FIRST one, and it only — wait, where'd she GO? She zipped off! She didn't hear the only-this-morning part! That's the IMPORTANT part!
...I heard it. ...You said only this morning. ...That it tucks itself away after, till next spring. ...That part. ...I think that part matters most.
Did somebody say BLOSSOM TOSS? New favorite thing — already, didn't even see it yet, doesn't matter, I'm IN. Where's the toss? Who's tossing? Quilla, you say something? Hang on — ZIPPY! Wait for me!
Now, did you catch what just happened, little ones? Chitter brought one true thing — and the very first friend to hear it kept only half, and ran off with that. And the friend who'd heard it right and whole — well, nobody waited for her at all.
Now, right then — into all that racket — somebody new came shuffling up the path. Quiet. Bristly. A little dusty from the road. And I'll tell you, my old heart just lifted. Well — would you look at that. Bramble's back.
Whoa — who's THAT? He's all... prickly. Hi, prickly fella! ...Is he gonna toss blossoms too? I don't actually know what we're doing anymore, but I'm IN.
Hi! Hi! New friend! ...Did YOU hear about the blossom? It's a — it's a toss, no, a contest, no — ...wait, what IS it now? ...See, even I'm losing it! Somebody slow me DOWN!
This is Bramble, little ones — a storyteller, from way out toward the borderlands beyond the creek. He travels, and he turns up when he turns up, and he always brings a tale in his pocket. Sit down, all of you. Bramble — tell them, old friend.
Story I heard once — out toward the borderlands. ...Sit yourselves down. ...It's a small one. ...It won't take but a minute.
...There was a creature, once, with ears so big it could hear a pinecone drop a mile off. ...And it was proud of those ears. ...It heard the wind change three valleys over. ...It heard the river arguing with the rocks, all night long.
...But there was a small friend who lived right beside it. ...And every morning, that little friend would whisper good-morning. ...And the big-eared creature never once heard it. ...Not once. ...Because it was always listening so far away.
...Until one morning, the big-eared creature went still. ...And quiet. ...And for the very first time, it heard the little voice right next to it. ...And it turned out to be the kindest sound of all. ...That's how the tale went, anyway.
...Wait. ...So the big ears were the PROBLEM? But it could hear EVERYTHING. ...Oh. ...Oh, but it couldn't hear the one right next to it. ...'Cause it was too busy hearing far-off stuff.
...It had to get quiet first. ...That's the part. ...You can't hear the near, small voice until you stop chasing the far, loud one. ...I think that's what it means.
Quiet. ...Okay. ...Quiet's hard for me — I'm always three thoughts ahead. ...But I get it. The little voice was RIGHT THERE the whole time. ...It just needed somebody to stop and hear it. ...Huh.
...So it's a sad story? About a lonely critter with giant ears? ...No — wait. ...It got the good-morning at the end. ...So it's a happy story. ...A happy story that took a long time to get happy.
...Mm. ...Could be.
Mm. You know — the Bible's got a line about exactly that. About being quick to listen, and slow to talk. We'll come to it by the water. For now... hold onto Bramble's big-eared creature. There's a reason the quiet ones hear best — it's the way God hears even the smallest, quietest voice. Maybe we can learn to, too.
Everybody, EVERYBODY — big news from the bend-tree! It's not just a toss, it's a whole CONTEST! A blossom CONTEST! Best blossom WINS! I don't know the rules yet but I'm gonna WIN them. New favorite thing — winning a thing I just heard about!
A blossom PARTY! Did everyone hear? Rex said it's a big blossom PARTY at the bend-tree — so we should bring SNACKS! You can't have a party with no snacks, that's just standing around being sad near a tree. I'll get the snacks! I GOT this!
Snacks at a CONTEST PARTY? Now it's TWO good things! Okay — so, a contest, AND a party, AND snacks, all at the blossom-tossing. ...Wait, is it tossing or contest? ...Doesn't matter, it's all of them. ALL the things. New favorite morning!
...It's not a party, though. ...He said it opens only this morning. ...If we go set up a party, we'll be busy the whole time the blossom is — ...are you all listening? ...You're not, are you.
It's not a CONTEST and it's not a PARTY! It's ONE blossom! It opened THIS MORNING and it CLOSES — why does nobody ever hear the END of what I say? Okay okay, new plan — I'll just say the whole thing again, but FASTER.
Snacks! Okay new plan — I'll build a snack-launcher AND a blossom-catcher, two contraptions, no, THREE, and we'll need streamers, do we have streamers, I'll MAKE streamers — wait, what were we doing? Doesn't matter, it's gonna be GREAT!
And off the busy ones went — Zippy and Rex and Bongo — to the wrong place. Not to the bend-tree at all, but over to the big old oak, to throw a party nobody had actually been invited to. And little Chitter and Quilla went hurrying after them, calling wrong tree, wrong tree, please just stop and listen — but nobody slowed down to hear it. Streamers up. Snacks out. Everyone busy as bees. And the whole while, away at the bend, the little blossom was open to the morning sun — and starting, ever so slowly, to tuck itself away.
Streamers — DONE. Snacks — DONE. Okay, the blossom contest can start any second now! ...Any second. ...Where's the blossoms? Where's the contest? ...Where's the BEND-TREE, even? Are we... at the bend-tree?
...Huh. ...I brought ALL the snacks. ...But I don't... actually know what we're celebrating. ...Does anybody? ...We were so busy getting ready, I never once stopped to ask what the thing even WAS.
I made the streamers! Are they good streamers? They're great streamers. ...Wait, what are the streamers FOR? ...What's the party FOR? ...Did anybody actually know, or did we all just... hear the word 'party' and start decorating?
...I did try to say. ...A few times. ...It's alright. ...I'm used to talking quiet. ...But the blossom won't wait for us to figure it out. ...It's closing right now, whether we listen or not.
I KNOW what it is! I've been SAYING what it is! It's the bend-tree blossom, and it's closing RIGHT NOW, while we all stand here by the WRONG tree holding SNACKS.
...Hey. ...Hey, everybody — stop. Just... stop a second. ...Remember Bramble's big-eared creature? It heard everything far away and missed the one thing right next to it. ...I think that's us. ...Right now. ...Let's get quiet. ...Chitter. ...Say it slow.
...Okay. ...I'm quiet. ...That's hard for me, but — I'm doing it. ...Go ahead, Chitter. ...We're listening. ...All the way to the end this time.
...Okay. ...Slow. ...The bend-tree. ...has its first blossom. ...It opened this morning. ...Only this morning. ...And then it tucks itself away till next spring. ...So if we want to see it... we have to go. ...Now.
...Quilla. ...You said that. ...This morning. ...The 'only this morning' part. ...You had it the WHOLE time, and we all talked right over you. ...I'm sorry. ...What else did you hear?
...Just that. ...Hear the whole thing before you run. ...That's all. ...And — ...if we hurry, slow and together? ...We might still catch it.
So off they went — all together this time, the right way, to the right tree. And they got there just in time to see it.
...Oh. ...Oh, look at it. ...It's just one little blossom. ...Pink, all the way open, right on the bend. ...And it's already — ...it's closing. ...Right now. ...We got here right at the very, very end.
...We almost missed it. ...We were all so busy talking, we nearly talked right past it. ...The one little thing Chitter came all that way to tell us. ...And Quilla knew. ...And we ran around the wrong tree with SNACKS.
...You heard me in the end. ...That's the part that counts. ...Not that I was right. ...That you went quiet, and you let me say it. ...That's a good kind of friend to be.
You CAME, though! You heard me — the slow way — and you CAME! ...And you brought snacks! ...So actually... ...can we have the party HERE? ...By the right tree? ...I'd love a party. I just wanted you to see the blossom first.
WAIT — best idea, and it's barely a contraption: we eat the snacks RIGHT HERE, looking at the spot where the blossom was, and Chitter tells the whole true story — slow this time — and NOBODY interrupts. ...Look at me. Slow. I can do slow. ...For like a minute.
And later, back by the water, with everyone's snacks finally being eaten where they belonged, I asked the friends one quiet thing. So. What did you find out today — about the listening... and the hearing?
Ooh — I KNOW this one, and it's not even a contraption! Hearing isn't catching every word at top speed. ...It's slowing WAY down — like, Shelly-slow — and waiting for the whole thing. ...And the quiet friend? The one who's not loud? ...They probably already heard it right. ...So you gotta get quiet enough to catch them.
...Said the fastest one at the whole creek. ...About slowing down. ...She's not wrong, though. ...I heard her. ...All the way to the end this time.
Mm. Named best by the quickest voice at the creek. You found it your own selves — you, and a quiet visitor with a story in his pocket. Now — that line I promised you. It comes from the Bible, from a letter called James — a letter a man named James wrote to his friends, a long, long time ago. Chapter one, verse nineteen. It goes like this.
So, then, my beloved brothers, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to anger.
...Swift to hear. ...That means quick to LISTEN. ...And slow to talk. ...That's the whole morning, right there. ...We were all swift to TALK, and slow to hear — and we went chasing the wrong tree. ...Somebody wrote that down, a long time ago.
That they did, little bear. Swift to hear — slow to speak. Hear the whole thing before you answer, and you'll catch the small, near voice that had it right all along — the way Quilla did. God made our ears to do that, you know. We just have to get quiet enough to let them. That's the honest gift of it.
And before we go — three frogs, one enormous question. The Mudpuppy Minutes.
Today on Mudpuppy Minutes — since EVERYBODY heard everything wrong today — we will explain... how EARS actually work. What is the SECRET of hearing?
EASY. Sound is little invisible BUGS. Teeny noise-bugs, and they fly into your ear and tickle it, and THAT'S hearing. The louder it is, the MORE bugs. That's why a shout has, like, a thousand bugs. Boom. Science.
AND ALSO — no, wait. There's no bugs. It's... it's the air. The sound shakes the AIR, like little ripples, and the ripples wiggle a tiny drum inside your ear, and your ear feels the wiggle. ...Huh. ...That actually makes sense.
...Wait. ...Splash. ...You're RIGHT. It's the wiggling air on a little ear-drum. No bugs at ALL. That's — that's the real one.
Oh no — too easy! Air? Everybody HAS air — that can't be the secret. Take it back. ...Mudpuppies — we have solved it! The secret of hearing is, you grow your ears EXTRA big, and then you hear EVERYTHING, all at once, forever. The bigger the ear, the better the listener. That's the energy.
Mm. Now hear me, little ones — sound isn't bugs, and bigger ears don't make a better listener. Splash had it right: sound is the air gently shaking, and a tiny drum inside your ear feeling the shake. That's the honest truth. As for those three? ...I'd let them keep their thousand noise-bugs.
...Good blossom. ...Glad you caught it. ...I'll be moving on, come morning — but the road bends back this way now and again. ...Maybe I'll pass through, and tell you another one.
We'll leave the path open for you, old friend. So this is Old Timber — with a little blossom caught just in time, and a story I'll be keeping. Until the next breeze brings us together, my friends.
And little ones — next time somebody's telling you something? Be quick to listen. Slow to talk. Hear the whole thing through — and you'll catch the small near voice that had it right all along.
See you next time... somewhere in Shiloh Creek.